I am staring at the sun at the sundial in the Olympic Park,
and this is a very nicely designed sundial.
Because not only the user is the gnomon - the pole for the sundial -
so my shadow reads 11 hours
and that is quite accurate.
It also has GMT and BST so in the summer months the time is still correct,
and time equalization is built in.
Well, time equation, the name sounds like pseudo-scientific mess, but it is not.
It is a comparison in the old-fashioned sense of the word; "make equal".
See, there are two kinds of time, so to speak.
There is solar time, the time that means it is noon when the sun is at its highest.
And there is standard time. Clock time.
A kind of average, ideal time
where afternoon occurs reliably every 24 hours.
And, well, there is a difference between the two.
Because when I look at my feet,
it's June now, so I'm here.
If it were March or September,
then I would stand here.
That is because the sun would be in a different position in the air, namely lower.
Because a) The Earth is turned a bit because of the seasons.
b) The Earth is an ellipse, not a circle.
So if I were to stand here, the sun would be in a different position,
but my shadow would still give 11 hours.
And if it is January or December, in the middle of winter,
then I would stand here and my shadow would still be-
Well, the sun would disappear behind the Olympic Stadium.
So my shadow would not be seen anywhere.
But if there would be a shadow,
then it would still give 11.
And the interesting thing about this is that sundials have only been equipped with this in the last few centuries.
Because in the past sundials were the 'only real' accurate indication of time.
When the sundial said it was noon
the sun was in the highest place in the sky and it was noon.
It did not matter what season it was.
And then the reliable clocks came
and later the railways and telecommunications.
It became necessary to different parts of the country
at the same time,
to keep the same 'afternoon'.
So it went from sundials that were accurate
and mechanical clocks that were always a bit wrong ...
to mechanical clocks that became accurate
and sundials that were always a bit wrong.
And from a few centuries ago you can find things
called 'equation clocks'.
Perfectly accurate clocks, reliable 24 hours in a day clocks, more or less.
Who intentionally adjusted their time,
either by means of a complicated clock mechanism,
or by the user who adjusted.
So that they were right with the sundials
and not the other way around.
Because sunrise in the east could be 20 to 25 minutes
rather than sunrise in the west of Great Britain.
So, time equalization.
It is something that means that sundials are no longer accurate,
despite that they ever were.
Something you might not know.
[Translation: Niels de Groot]